The top 10 human resources policies every business needs
Workplace policies define a business’s expectations regarding employee behaviour and performance in the workplace, as well as outlining how employers and employees can work together to create a safe and productive environment. These policies often describe the legal requirements of the employer to the employee and vice versa and differ from workplace procedures which provide more detailed instructions for employees and employers to meet the policy requirements.

Having effective HR policies and procedures in place is as important for small businesses as it is for large businesses, as together, they create a transparent and structured work environment with clear expectations and consequences.

In this article, we outline the top 10 HR policies and procedures that every business should consider adopting as part of their employee handbook to safeguard their workplace and foster a safe, productive and respectful working environment.

1. Employee code of conduct
An employee code of conduct is a fundamental workplace policy that outlines the behavioural standards expected of employees. It sets the tone for employee expectations and professional interactions and supports a positive workplace culture.

At its most basic a code of conduct will clearly set out the behavioural standards expected of employees in a single clear list, which can include expectations surrounding:

Confidentiality and conflict of interest
Attendance and punctuality
Break and mealtimes
Proper use of company property and social media
Client interaction expectations
Dress code
Misconduct reporting procedures
How employees will demonstrate company values
Examples of professional behaviour and unacceptable behaviour
2. Workplace health and safety policy
A critical component of any workplace, a workplace health and safety policy ensures compliance with occupational health and safety laws and aims to protect both employers and employees. Workplace health and safety policies should give employees a clear understanding of their duty to maintain their own health and safety in the workplace and their obligations to others.

Policy elements may include:

Responsibilities for workers, managers and senior leaders
Emergency and hazard response procedures
Risk assessments
First aid availability
Equipment maintenance and safety
Safe handling of materials
Mental health support
3. Equal employment opportunity and anti-discrimination policy
This policy is important for maintaining an inclusive and respectful workplace. It outlines what constitutes inappropriate behaviour regarding equal employment opportunity and workplace discrimination and provides a clear process for addressing concerns.

Key aspects may involve:

Definitions of harassment and discrimination, including sexual harassment
Reporting procedures
Employee education and training
Steps for handling complaints
Confidentiality measures
Management’s responsibilities
4. Grievance handling policy
This policy supports employees and employers in formally raising concerns or complaints. It ensures that grievances are managed fairly and consistently for both parties.

It may include:

Steps for lodging a grievance
Response timelines and protocols
Investigation procedures
Confidentiality guidelines
Possible outcomes and appeal processes
5. Discipline and termination policy
Clearly defined disciplinary procedures help employers manage employee behaviour and performance and ensure fairness when taking disciplinary action. This policy provides guidance into how conduct breaches are addressed.

It may cover:

Steps taken when policies are violated
Investigation and documentation procedures
Performance counselling
Employee rights, including appeal options
Grounds for termination related to conduct and poor performance
Pre- and post-termination steps
Communication of termination decisions
6. Leave policy
A leave policy ensures a fair and consistent approach to the taking of leave, including how leave is to be applied for by employees and the terms for approval. The policy also outlines each leave entitlement offered by the business.

Typical inclusions:

Entitlement to leave
Providing notice of absence and evidence
Applying for leave
Cashing out leave
Payment protocols
7. Information communication technology (ICT) use policy
This policy defines appropriate use of the company’s internet and email systems. It helps manage risks, enhance productivity, and maintain data security. It can sometimes also contain components of a social media policy.

Policy components may include:

Rules for internet access and browsing
Acceptable online behaviour
Data security protocols
Download and file sharing restrictions
Social media and networking usage
Guidelines for professional email communication
Email use outside of working hours or off-site
8. Personal use of the telephone at work policy
To minimise distractions and maintain professionalism, this policy outlines acceptable phone usage – both personal and work-related – during work hours.

Coverage might include:

When and where personal phones may be used
Storage of phones during office hours
Guidelines for personal calls
Work phone usage protocols
Acceptable use standards for work devices and other related company property
9. Fitness for work (drug and alcohol) policy
This policy promotes workplace safety and outlines a business’s stance on substance use. It may also detail disciplinary procedures and testing protocols.

Common topics include:

A business’s tolerance toward substance use
Drug and alcohol testing procedures
Rules around social drinking (e.g. after work events)
Protocols for handling intoxicated employees
10. Smoking policy
A smoking policy clarifies rules around tobacco use on business premises. It is essential for health, safety, and legal compliance.

This policy may specify:

Whether smoking is permitted
Designated smoking areas
Other policies
Other company policies may be more important and relevant to certain businesses and industries. For example, where employees are provided with a motor vehicle, or they regularly work remotely, then relevant HR procedures and policies are recommended. Where there are concerns with how employees communicate, organisations should consider creating a communication policy that can support other efforts to improve workplace communications between employees, such as training and coaching. Similarly, businesses may wish to document their efforts to provide career growth through training and other development opportunities in HR policies to ensure employees are aware of those opportunities and how they can make use of them.

Workplace procedures
Workplace procedures often accompany specific HR policies to provide step-by-step instructions for employees on how to comply with the policy. They may not always be necessary, however once written, they must be followed. For example, failure by management or human resources to follow their own grievance procedures, or to act in line with the code of conduct, can be a breach of workplace laws.

When writing a procedure, employers must ensure they convey a fair representation of the current practices of the business or where the business intends to be. It is also recommended that when a business goes to write a procedure, where possible, they engage in consultation with the employees most impacted by that procedure. Employee consultation and education will help ensure a collective understanding of the value of the procedure and motivate employees to follow and uphold it.

Signing and acknowledging policies and procedures
The suite of policies outlined above addresses the key compliance issues employers need to manage to stay ahead of industrial relations laws, maintain workplace safety and set behavioural expectations for new and existing employees.

It is recommended that employees are provided with copies of the HR policies when they start and whenever changes are made to those policies.

Additionally, employers may ask that employees sign an acknowledgement that they have read and understood the policies and procedures and store this on the employee’s file. Acknowledgement that the employee has read and understood a policy can be crucial if they face consequences for breaching it.